Ladies and gentlemen,

In Germany, "totalitarianism" is a burnt term - but one that still glows and threatens to scorch all who touch it. The totalitarianism of the National Socialists implemented the industrial extermination of people who were branded as racially or otherwise "inferior". Hannah Arendt speaks here of the "fabrication of corpses". Around six million Jews alone fell victim to mass administrative murder. "Resist the beginnings" was therefore part of the raison d'état of both German states in the post-war period. The term "totalitarianism" is therefore rightly surrounded by the utmost discursive caution - the fear of saying something wrong or something that a political opponent could interpret as a forbidden relativization of Nazi crimes and the Holocaust in particular is great. On the other hand, we live in a social climate damaged by moralization and demagogy, in which cancel culture, including mutual denunciation for supposedly "wrong" opinions, is desired by parts of politics and even promoted by tax-funded "reporting offices" such as those for "anti-feminism".

### A delicate discussion

It is conceivable that the mere application of the term "totalitarianism" to current experiences could be interpreted badly. Contact guilt specialists might say: "Totalitarianism equals National Socialism equals the Holocaust. Consequently, to apply the term 'totalitarianism' to a contemporary phenomenon is to compare the present with the Holocaust."
If one accepts this "logic of association", it would be de facto socially impossible to use the term "totalitarianism" at all. However, the use of a clearly defined concept of totalitarianism to analyze current phenomena is essential in order to recognize and prevent the emergence of a new totalitarianism. Resist the beginnings: This means saying exactly what is revealed to us in the present - be it what it is, be it perhaps the monstrous. A philosophical clarification of three terms can help us to master this difficult duty, especially for a German in particular. "Total" means going the whole hog, permeating everything. Total rule is therefore a form of government that seeks to dominate all aspects of human existence. For such a project to be conceivable at all, certain concepts must be mastered. First of all, ideology is necessary: The would-be totalitarian ruler must simplify reality schematically and make it explainable from a few, preferably a single, points of view. Whether any such explanation is plausible can be disregarded. In any case, total rule requires a guiding idea. This can be a philosophical thesis such as historical materialism: History is to be understood as the history of class struggles, which, albeit in stages and changeful, but precisely following a set pattern, is heading towards the classless society. An ideology is the speech or doctrine that results from an idea - such as historical materialism. The implications of an idea for the most diverse areas of culture are formulated within the framework of the ideology in order to make them usable as an organizing principle. Whether this is done in a realistic or unrealistic way, in a conclusive or inconclusive form, does not matter. What matters to the totalitarian spirit is the implementation of a single idea in all areas of human interest. Why does a totalitarian movement necessarily need a guiding idea, a corresponding ideology? Let us consider three reasons, although a few more are apparent.

Firstly, without a guiding idea that can be related to every object, it is simply not possible for the total ruler to address every object of human significance and to integrate it into the discipline of his rule - as the project of total rule demands.

Secondly, without a guiding ideology, the necessary implementation cadres of total rule cannot be conditioned to a uniform way of judging and acting that keeps them capable of reacting to changing events. However, this is necessary for the implementation of any kind of rule. Thirdly, only through a guiding principle of all political thought that is ultimately made binding by force can such a degree of self-orientation of the population be achieved that is sufficient to stabilize total rule.

Subjects of total rule have experiences every day that have nothing to do with the official ideology or even contradict it. Only through a clear guiding principle, for the disregard of which there is a credible threat of some kind of punishment, can it be achieved that in everyday life almost everyone will make an effort to reinterpret experiences that obviously contradict the ideology in such a way that they can still be regarded as confirmation of the ideology - or at least do not openly expose it as wrongful, or a lie.

Finally, we define the term "totalitarianism" as the attitude that underlies totalitarian rule and works towards its establishment. In supra-individual terms, totalitarianism is the political program that seeks to establish total rule in the sense of a certain ideology. If the attitude of totalitarianism could build its own state, it would be a totalitarian state that aims to realize total rule in the sense of a certain ideology. There is a clear factual logic to be discovered in the triangle of the terms "total rule", "ideology" and "totalitarianism": politicians who want to completely and pervasively subjugate the world around them require an ideology as the structural provider of the total rule they are striving for - and totalitarianism is the mindset and the political program for bringing about this total rule step by step.

In order to make the concept of totalitarianism, in this delicate sense, usable for application to current phenomena, we still have to solve a philosophical task that can be expressed as a question: Is it possible to act in a totalitarian way by mistake, unintentionally, as it were, without realizing it? In other words, to act as if one wanted to achieve the establishment of a totalitarian state, as if one were a totalitarian?

Let's assume the answer is "no" - no one can "accidentally" act in a way that supports a political program to establish totalitarian rule. If this were true, we would be in a difficult position: in the event that we recognize a political tactic in the present that we are convinced is totalitarian, we would have to directly accuse of totalitarianism those who carry it out. Short and unproductive discussions would be inevitable.

But the correct answer is "yes": in principle, it is possible to participate in the implementation of a program that amounts to total domination, i.e. that is totalitarian, without being aware of it. It is indeed possible to pursue totalitarian politics without being a totalitarian. Not everyone understands the factual logic of total rule. It always arises from a movement that gradually gives an ideology cultural dominance - in order to ultimately subjugate society as a whole, including the government. Several contemporary political projects have the potential to become an element of total control. Many governments, Germany in particular, are going along with them without realizing it. Let us look at two examples.


### Two cases with (risk) potential

A central bank digital currency (CBDC) would make all payments centrally analyzable and, through central programming, would also allow selected individuals or groups to be blocked from the purchase of certain products and services. The use of financial transactions and access to them as a political weapon is not inconceivable in Western democracies either. In 2022, Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau blocked the accounts of long-distance truck drivers because they took part in protests against the coronavirus regime. In Germany, journalists who are highly critical of the government are confronted with the sudden closure of their private bank accounts by institutions with which they have been associated, in some cases for decades. In the USA, Republican Tom Emmer is campaigning for a law that would prohibit the Federal Reserve - a cartel of private banks, which acts as the lender of last resort in the USA and is often misunderstood as a state institution - to prohibit the introduction of "surveillance-style" digital central bank money. He explicitly refers to the Chinese government and its practice of using digital money to control and punish citizens for self-defined misconduct. 

Another project with totalitarian potential is the new pandemic treaty run by the largely privately funded WHO. In the slipstream of fatal public disinterest, this treaty and major changes to the International Health Regulations are intended to turn the WHO into a global central authority for health issues. According to the current draft treaty, the WHO will be the sole authority to determine what constitutes a public health emergency of international concern (PHEIC), what people in the signatory states must do to respond to the threat and what constitutes disinformation in this context. Given the enormous fear potential that can be mobilized on all health issues, it would effectively have the power to directly influence the governments of large parts of the world's population through central announcements.

Democrats have a common interest in paying attention to totalitarian tendencies and potentials in current politics and denouncing them directly. However, a fair form should be chosen: "You are doing X in order to serve the legitimate goal Y. In fact, however, you are encouraging a totalitarian policy. Let me explain this to you: ..." We owe it to every fellow citizen to choose this form of address out of respect. Anyone who adopts a totalitarian stance does not necessarily have to be a totalitarian.

***

Michael Andrick has a doctorate in philosophy and lives in Berlin, where he works in the private sector. He is a columnist for the Berliner Zeitung and also publishes not only in der Freitag, but also in DLF Kultur, Welt and Cicero. His new book "Im Moralgefängnis" - "In the prison of moralism" - will be published by Westend Verlag in February.

This text is an abridged and revised lecture given to the "Netzwerk Kritische Richter und Anwälte" (KRiStA) - "Network of critical judges and attorneys" on October 21, 2023.

I translated it with automatic support from the article "Was ist Totalitarismus?" - "What is totalitarianism?" printed in der Freitag issued on January 4th, 2024.
